new RFC: 57/STATUS-Simple-Scaling (#580)
vacp2p/rfc: content/docs/rfcs/57/README.md

2) Scaling a large set of content topics requires distributing these over several mesh networks (which this document refers to as pubsub topic shards).

This document focuses on the second scaling dimension.
With the scaling solutions discussed in this document,
each content topics can have a large set of active users, but still has to fit in a single pubsub mesh.

> *Note:* While it is possible to use the same content topic name on several shards,
each node that is interested in this content topic has to be subscribed to all respective shards, which does not scale.
Splitting content topics in a more sophisticated and efficient way will be part of a future document.

# Relay Shards

Sharding the [Waku Relay](/spec/11/) network is an integral part of scaling the Status app.

[51/WAKU2-RELAY-SHARDING](/spec/51/) specifies shards clusters, which are sets of `1024` shards (separate pubsub mesh networks).
Content topics specified by application protocols can be distributed over these shards.
The Status app protocols are assigned to shard cluster `16`,
as defined in [52/WAKU2-RELAY-STATIC-SHARD-ALLOC](/spec/52/).

> [51/WAKU2-RELAY-SHARDING](/spec/51/) specifies three sharing methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[51/WAKU2-RELAY-SHARDING](/spec/51/) specifies three sharding methods.
```
:D

Infrastructure nodes are provided by the community owner, or by members of the respective community.

## Owner-Mapped Communities

Infrastructure nodes are part of a subset of the shards in the range `128 - 767`.
Recommendations on choosing this subset will be added in a future version of this document.

Status fleet nodes make up a part of these infrastructure nodes.

## 1:1 chat

Infrastructure nodes are part of a subset of the shards in the range `768 - 985` (similar to owner-mapped communities).
Recommendations on choosing this subset will be added in a future version of this document.

Desktop clients can choose to only use filter and lightpush.

> *Note*: Discussion: I'd suggest to set this as the default for the MVP.
The load on infrastructure nodes would not be higher, because they have to receive and relay each message anyways.
This comes as a trade-off to anonymity and decentralization,
but can significantly improve scaling.
We still have k-anonymity because several chat pairs are mapped into one content topic.
We could improve on this in the future, and research the applicability of PIR (private information retrieval) techniques in the future.

# Infrastructure Shards

> ## Control Message Shards

Reviewer: If I understand correctly, general control messages will still be relayed _by default_ in the main Community shard? This section just discusses "special" control message sharding, for large messages. For clarity it may be worth being explicit here (or earlier) about which traffic goes to the static community shard ("all" by default), and that this separate sharding is not a requirement for all control messages? E.g. renaming this section to `Sharding for large Control Messages`. Hoping this makes sense. 😅

Author: Agreed. Wdyt about keeping the name *control message shard*,
but making explicit that control messages CAN be routed via control message shards, but don't have to be?

Reviewer: Makes sense! In other words, the way I read this RFC is that it starts with general description of static shard allocation per community and moves to specific further shard separation techniques which may or may not be required based on community size/need.

Author: I added more context in dd23486 
Wdyt? Imo, with this it should be obvious that other messages are still relayed as per normal operation.
I can rephrase if it is not clear yet.

Reviewer: Yes! Looks good and is clear. Thanks.

To get the maximum scaling for select large communities for the Status scaling MVP,
control messages that cause significant load (at a high user number) SHOULD be moved to a separate control message shard.
These control messages comprise:

* community description
* membership update 
* backup
* community request to join response
* sync profile picture

The relay functionality of control messages shards SHOULD be provided by infrastructure nodes.

> Desktop clients should use light protocols as the default for media shards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Desktop clients should use light protocols as the default for control message shards.
```
I think... :)

Strong Desktop clients MAY opt in to support the relay network.

Each large community (in the index range of `16 - 127`) can get its dedicated control message shard (in the index range `896 - 1023`) if deemed necessary.
The Status CC community uses shard `896` as its control message shard.
This comes with trade-offs to decentralization and anonymity (see *Security Considerations* section).

## Media Shards

Similar to control messages, media-heavy communities should use separate media shards (in the index range `896 - 1023`) for disseminating messages with large media data.
The Status CC community uses shard `897` as its media shard.

## Infrastructure-focused Community

Large communities MAY choose to mainly rely on infrastructure nodes for all message transfers (not limited to control, and media messages).
Desktop clients of such communities should use light protocols as the default for media shards.
Strong Desktop clients MAY opt in to support the relay network.

> *Note*: This is not planned for the MVP.

> # Light Clients

Reviewer: I'm not sure if necessary, but we previously tried to move away from the binary sounding "light" vs "full" nodes in terminology (though people seem to fall back to these familiar terms). Reasoning then was that we really provide a spectrum of options for nodes, who can choose based on either resource restrictions or own motivations what level of service they want to provide/consume. I'm OK with using "light" here, as long as we don't set this in stone as a special type of client - i.e. nodes can choose to fully relay for one community, but only use the light protocols for another, etc.

Author: I will rename this section to light protocols, and adjust accordingly.

Author: done: 1f552ada1

Light clients can use the use light protocols to save bandwidth,
at the (global) cost of not contributing to the network.

These light protocols are

* [19/WAKU2-LIGHTPUSH](/spec/19/) for sending messages
* [12/WAKU2-FILTER](/spec/12/) for requesting messages with specific attributes
* [34/WAKU2-PEER-EXCHANGE](/spec/34) for discovering peers

# Waku Archive

Archive nodes are Waku nodes that offer the Waku archive service via the Waku store protocol ([13/WAKU2-STORE](/spec/13/)).
They are part of a set of shards and store all messages disseminated in these shards.
Nodes can request history messages via the [13/WAKU2-STORE](/spec/13/).

The store service is not limited to a Status fleet.

> Anybody can run a Waku Archive node in the Status shards.

Reviewer: Although we don't have proper capability discovery defined here yet - in other words, nodes would simply assume such Archive nodes "store everything".

Author: I will add a note :).

Author: done: a960388

```
subscribe("/status/xyz", 18)
```

which means: connect to the `"status/xyz"` content topic on shard `18` within the Status shard cluster.

## Status Communities

In order to associate a community with a shard,
the community description protobuf is extended as follows.

```protobuf

syntax = "proto3";

message CommunityDescription {
  // The Lamport timestamp of the message
  uint64 clock = 1;
  // A mapping of members in the community to their roles
  map<string,CommunityMember> members = 2;
  // The permissions of the Community
  CommunityPermissions permissions = 3;
  // The metadata of the Community
  ChatIdentity identity = 5;
  // A mapping of chats to their details
  map<string,CommunityChat> chats = 6;
  // A list of banned members
  repeated string ban_list = 7;
  // A mapping of categories to their details
  map<string,CommunityCategory> categories = 8;
  // The admin settings of the Community
  CommunityAdminSettings admin_settings = 10;
  // If the community is encrypted
  bool encrypted = 13;
  // The list of tags
  repeated string tags = 14;
  // index of the community's shard within the Status shard cluster
  uint16 relay_shard_index = 15
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: Maybe show the diff here so it is clear that the `relay_shard_index` is being added?

Author: Agreed, the change should be explicit. Added a clarification in 00dcaabc60
wdyt?
(Imo, the protobuf should be copyable and not a diff.)

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```diff

syntax = "proto3";

message CommunityDescription {
  // The Lamport timestamp of the message
  uint64 clock = 1;
  // A mapping of members in the community to their roles
  map<string,CommunityMember> members = 2;
  // The permissions of the Community
  CommunityPermissions permissions = 3;
  // The metadata of the Community
  ChatIdentity identity = 5;
  // A mapping of chats to their details
  map<string,CommunityChat> chats = 6;
  // A list of banned members
  repeated string ban_list = 7;
  // A mapping of categories to their details
  map<string,CommunityCategory> categories = 8;
  // The admin settings of the Community
  CommunityAdminSettings admin_settings = 10;
  // If the community is encrypted
  bool encrypted = 13;
  // The list of tags
  repeated string tags = 14;
  // index of the community's shard within the Status shard cluster
+  uint16 relay_shard_index = 15
}
```

Author: see above

Reviewer 3: You could add an empty line before line 129 to separate the new field from other fields.

## 1:1 Chat

[55/STATUS-1TO1-CHAT](/spec/55) uses partitioned topics to map 1:1 chats to a set of 5000 content topics.
This document extends this mapping to 8192 content topics that are, in turn, mapped to 128 shards in the index range of `768 - 895`.

```
contentPartitionsNum = 8192
contentPartition = mod(publicKey, contentPartitionsNum)
partitionContentTopic = "contact-discovery-" + contentPartition

partitionContentTopic = keccak256(partitionContentTopic)

shardNum = 128
shardIndex = 768 + mod(publicKey, shardNum)

```

# Infrastructure Nodes

As described in [30/ADAPTIVE-NODES](/spec/30/),
Waku supports a continuum of node types with respect to available resources.
Infrastructure nodes are powerful nodes that have a high bandwidth connection and a high up-time.

This document, which informs about simple ways of scaling Status over Waku,
assumes the presence of a set of such infrastructure nodes in each shard.
Infrastructure nodes are especially important for providing connectivity in the roll-out phase.

Infrastructure nodes are not limited to Status fleets, or nodes run by community owners.

> Anybody can run infrastructure nodes.

Reviewer 3: In the context of Status MVP, to ensure good UX, one need will need to run a node with postgres and some minimal requirements. Should we mention this in the RFC?
